Hello everyone and welcome to the lecture on scatterplot.
This lecture room to learn how to use G-G plot to place points on a plot to show possible correlations
between two features of a dataset.
Let's go out and jump to our studio and see how this works.
All right so here we are our studio.
First thing we're going to go ahead and do is in our script say library and call you plot two and we're
going to be working with the built 10 empty cars data frame that we know pretty well.
Let's go ahead and just check the head of it so we can get a reminder what it looks like.
And this is what the data frame looks like.
We have some cars the index and basically a bunch of information on those cars.
Now let's go ahead and start building up our understanding of how to create a scatterplot with G-G plot
.
So first thing you to do is create our data and aesthetics layer.
So we're going to go ahead and do is say G-G plot Hasen our data which is going to just be Earth.
So you have two options here you can say data equals death or you don't want to write so much you can
just pass in ZF and it will automatically know that the first argument blocks the data and then we have
to in aesthetics.
So in this case it's him doing a scatterplot.
I want both x and y information.
So I'm going to go ahead and say X equals wait and y equals mpg.
Let's go at an assigned that to the P.L. variable and then finally to actually see something come out
on the screen.
We need our geometries
geometry
and the geometry for a scatterplot is Geum underscore points.
And again if you didn't know that you could reference Chichi I mentioned in the histogram lecture to
find that let's go ahead and print this out and see what we get.
OK so there we have a rather simple but effective scatterplot replot mpg versus weight.
We can kind of see this trend where as your weight increases your MPG goes down which kind of makes
sense.
A heavier car should have worst mpg since that's it for the basics of a scatterplot.
Let's go ahead and see how we could use that cheat sheet.
As I mentioned in the previous lecture to add some more features of this plot I'm going to go ahead
and jump to the cheat sheet now.
All right so here I am at the cheat sheet.
In using this cheat sheet I would come over here to the two variables sections and I'm working with
two variables and sister are both continuous.
So weight was continuous and mpg was continuous.
I know I'm using geometer score point.
So I notice I have alpha color fill shape and size to play around with.
So let's go ahead and see how we can use those to affect our plot jump back to our studio now.
All right.
I'm back at our studio and I'm going to do is play around of some of these different factors.
Let me go ahead and clear this con. and start editing our scripts.
OK so for things like size and shape and Alpha we can just Passement to the geometry layer like this
we can say size and then we can pass in a general number for size.
So for instance I pass and five.
It'll make the size a little larger by pass in something like 10.
Ill just make them huge.
So you can play around with sizes a number in case you want to increase the size of those data points
.
And another thing pasand to geometry we'll go back to the default size and say something like Alpha
will say zero point five actually that's going to make the size large enough so you can see the effects
or Sagan size it was five and then you can begin to see that the overlapping points if we check it out
here.
Go ahead and zoom in.
We can see that these overlapping points actually will begin to become darker.
So again if you click plot zoom here you'll get a nice pop up zoomed version of the plot continuing
on.
Let's go ahead and talk about some more complicated ways of sizing and shaping our points.
So right now we just put in alpha and we said size with a certain number where we can actually size
our data points based off of other features in their data frame.
So right now we're just plotting our way versus mpg or I should actually say mpg versus Wake's amputees
on the y axis.
And if I could pass in size as a regular integer but if I pass it in using æsthetics inside the geometry
layer I can begin to say sizes and shapes are defined by other features or columns in my data frame
.
So let me go ahead and show you what I mean by that.
If we check our data one more time and we showed up here in the global environment variable.
We can see that we have horsepower as an other option to plot with.
So I'm going to go ahead and say inside æsthetics size equals HP and if I run this code from source
notice now the size of my scatterplot points grow bigger as the HP value the horsepower grows bigger
and that's because I was able to put them inside the aesthetics of the geometry layer.
Again if I didn't put this inside the aesthetics argument here inside the geometry point layer then
I would have had to use size equal to some sort of standard integer value.
But if I begin to play around with this aesthetics I can use aesthetics in the geometry layer such as
size and shape to actually define these.
Basically the way these points are plotted out by other features in my data frame that I didn't define
at the data level.
OK.
So let's go in and keep playing around this idea.
Imagine I wanted to set the size of my points by a let's go ahead and say and other features such as
cylinders.
So if I look at my data frame and from just knowing my data frame I have four cylinder cars six cylinder
cars an eight cylinder cars.
If I just pass and size is equal to cylinders I won't get exactly what I want.
So if I go ahead and run this I will get cylinders.
So I do get the sizing relevant to the cylinders or the number of cylinders.
But notice if I just say See L are size equal C Y L R will automatically think that cylinder's is a
continuous variable values.
So it goes for 5 6 7 8.
But knowing the dataset and knowing what we know about cars in case you know a little bit about cars
that these cylinder numbers should actually be usually even at least for a dataset there all even two
there for six or eight.
So I know there's a set number of cylinders and this actually should be then a factor value meaning
I have groupings by cylinder and if you remember back to the very first grammar of graphics lecture
we actually showed how we could use Fassett grid to make multiple plots based off a cylinder and we
had three sets of cylinders for six and eight.
So it doesn't make sense that we have five and seven here in this auto legend the way we can fix that
if we know it should be some sort of categorical type feature that I will call factor on that column
.
Let's go ahead and run this
and make sure I have enough parentheses here.
OK.
So here we have now the corrects version of how we should actually be sizing by some sort of fact factor
.
And again what I mean by factors that that feature is categorical meaning we only have four six and
eight as options.
It's not some continuous spectrum of cylinder values something to keep in mind though is using size
for a discrete variable just like we're using right now isn't usually advised.
What you probably want to do is instead define shapes for the street variables.
So have four cylinder cars be a triangle maybe six cylinder cars a square an eight cylinder cars b a
circle or something like that.
And we can actually do that by passing in shape instead of size.
So let's try that out.
We'll go ahead and say shape.
Run the source near enough you notice.
Let's go to click zoom.
My different cylinder numbers have a different shape to them.
So these points are pretty small.
Let's go ahead and change their size and we'll do that outside of this aesthetic argument or aesthetic
function but still inside the GM underscore points.
So I'm going to go ahead and say Khama size equals five.
Just to make it more clear.
Now if I run the source now I can really see how clicking zoom here how four cylinder cars are circles
six cylinder cars or triangles an eight cylinder cars are squares.
OK so that's a really useful method for us to learn.
And the key thing I want you to be aware of is that if we're calling things like shape and size and
want him to be based off of other features or columns from our data or data frame we should be passing
them into this ABS function inside of the geometry layer.
Otherwise when we call things like size or shape we'll have to call them by some sort of standard integer
value.
So to shown that another example of passing and things to this aesthetic function inside the geometry
layer Let's go ahead and try coloring by cylinder as well.
So I'm going to go ahead and say color is equal to it's going to say Factor seat while
so see color equals factor make sure that's inside statics.
It's good to make sure princes are balance looks like everything's ok and make sure we get no errors
when we run this and there we have it.
So now both shape and color are being affected by another column or a data frame.
And that's a key difference.
I could still use color outside of aesthetics but then I would have to define it not using another datapoint
so I have to say something like size color and then it would just have to be a standard like blue or
something and that everything would have to be the same color.
So actually one of the fine size or color or any of those other additional arguments we saw that cheat
sheet.
But one of the findings by another column or variable in my data frame.
I have to pass into this a static function inside of the geometry layer.
And finally before we finish this lecture I want to go and build back from this basic plot and talk
a little bit more about color.
So again we could have just said in the geometry layer color is equal to.
Let's go ahead and say just a standard color blue.
And then all the points would have been colored blue.
We can also pass next color arguments.
In any case you're not familiar with hex color codes.
They're basically just color coded models that standardized different colors to a certain code and they
usually start of a hash tag.
Let me go ahead and show you a great resource for picking out these hecks color codes.
And then we'll finish out the lecture we're talking about scale color gradients.
So in order to use a hex color code and I'll show you an example of what one looks like instead of saying
blue you can type in a text color code and choose a particular color that you want in this case.
This is a nice teal.
Now the standard colors such as like purple green red blue etc. are your classic colors.
They're going to our will know them by their character street name if you want to get more specific
you can use these hex color codes.
Let me go ahead and jump to the browser and show you how you can find these hex color codes.
OK so I quickly jumped to the Google Chrome browser here.
So go to Google dot com and search for hecks color.
You can even search for hecks color picker and you'll get a bunch of different links and Web sites that
help you choose a color and convert that to a hex code.
I really like this color dash hex.
Com.
There's a ton of Web sites.
A lot of them are really great.
And to the point.
But this one basically has a list of users latest favorite colors but you can also get your own hex
codes so if you check out a peer at top let me go and zoom in here I'm here in the black square.
You can choose whatever color you want using this sort of colored distinguisher.
So if I want let's say this lime green looking color I can choose that color and it will spit out the
hex code and hex codes must start with this powder hash tag symbol.
So I'm going to copy that code go back to our studio.
So I'll just minimize this.
Here we have our studio and we can pass in that hex code has start for hash tag or pound sign.
And then if I run that source now we have that interesting line green color.
So that's one way of picking out specific colors for G-G plot.
You can use those hex color picker's Passement color.
Now as we've mentioned earlier we can actually set colors by other features in our data Frane.
So for instance by passing in a here and saying color equals HP we can go ahead and say run that source
.
We make sure there's a comma there.
That has to be separate from that source.
And now I can see that HP has been colored by a different feature and as is features continuous HP is
continuous.
I get a nice continuous blue depending on what their horsepower is.
So we kind of get this feeling that lighter blues are on the heavier weight car is of less miles per
gallon.
Cuyp it kind of makes sense because you'd expect more horsepower from a heavier car and the car if that's
heavier with more horsepower probably gets less mpg issue I have here is that these blues aren't super
clear on that sort of trend.
So let's go ahead and try to choose our low color and our high color for this plot and we can do that
by adding a scale color gradient to this.
So I'm going to go ahead and say peel too close and then the additional argument here is going to be
scale underscore color underscore gradients.
Now what this will allow us to do is pasan a value for a low color and a value for a high color.
So I said I'd go ahead and say low equals.
For instance was going to choose blue a cooler color for low Ale's go and say high equals we'll just
say red and this will work because I specified color as an aesthetic inside this geometry layer.
We'll go out and set this to all three and then I will go ahead and print he'll three.
Let's see if this works.
And there we have it.
Now the trend this quite a bit clear.
So if I zoom in on this I can see that the higher horsepower cars tend to be heavier with less mpg and
the lower horsepower cars tend to have a lower way and a higher Myer's mpg.
And this actually also makes it really easy to pick out outliers on the horsepower scale.
OK.
So the way we were able to do that was by specifying here a US color equals HP.
And then after that adding the scale underscore color underskirt gradients with a low and high value
.
And again we could have passed our own hex values here.
So it could have passed in the old hex value if I wanted that teal green and made maybe some sort of
weird color gradient here.
So from green to red and now I can really see where the high horsepower is so it's up to you to choose
what scales you think are best.
And there's lots of online tools help me pick out those sort of scales.
OK.
So that's it for the scatterplot lecture.
Go ahead and check the notes or the documentation for a couple more examples on how to make nice scatter
plots.
Thanks everyone and I'll see you at the next lecture.